Several edits to  improve readability and conform to Markdown guidelines (#71)
cvc5/ethos: user_manual.md

```shell
ethos <option>* <file>
```

The set of available options `<option>` are given in the appendix. Note the command line interface of `ethos` expects exactly one file (which itself may reference other files via the `include` command as we will see later). The file and options can appear in any order.

The Ethos will either emit an error message indicating:

- the kind of failure (type checking, proof checking, lexer error),
- the line and column of the failure,

or will print a [successful response](#responses) when it finished parsing all commands in the file or encounters and `exit` command.
Further output can be given by user-provided `echo` commands.

### Streaming input to the Ethos

The `ethos` binary accepts input piped from stdin. The following are all equivalent ways of running `ethos`:

```shell
% ethos <file>
% ethos < <file>
% cat <file> | ethos
```

## Overview of Eunoia's features

Eunoia is the name of the logical framework and language that is supported natively by the Ethos checker.
Although it is a general logical framework, Eunoia is geared towards defining proof systems used by SMT solvers and writing proofs in those systems.

> Eunoia files are text file that are typically given the suffix `*.eo`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Eunoia files are text files that are typically given the suffix `*.eo`.
```

The core features of Eunoia include:

- A syntax and type system for defining theory signatures that follows those of SMT-LIB version 3.0.
- Constructs for associating syntactic categories (as specified by SMT-LIB e.g. `<numeral>`) with types.
- A command, `declare-rule`, for defining proof rules.
- A set of commands for specifying proofs (`step`, `assume`, and so on), whose syntax closely follows that of the Alethe proof format (for details, see [here](https://verit.gitlabpages.uliege.be/alethe/specification.pdf)).
- A set of built-in basic types and a library of operations (`eo::add`, `eo::mul`, `eo::concat`, `eo::extract`) for performing computations over values.

>   <!--CT It would be more consistent with the rest of the terminology to use `define-program` instead -->

Reviewer: Agreed, we can maybe rename this in a future stable release.

Author: Sounds good.

> - A command, `program`, for defining side conditions as ordered list of rewrite rules.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A command, `program`, for defining side conditions as an ordered list of rewrite rules.
```

- A command, `declare-oracle-fun`, for defining external, user-provided oracles, that is, functions whose semantics are given by external binaries. Oracles can be used, e.g., for modular proof checking.
- Commands for file inclusion (`include`) and referencing (`reference`). The latter command can be used to specify the name of an `*.smt2` input file that the proof is associated with.

In the following sections, we describe these features in more detail. A full syntax for the commands is given at the end of this document.

### Declaring theory signatures

In Eunoia, as in SMT-LIB version 3.0, a common BNF is used to specify _terms_ (expressions denoting values), _types_ (expressions denoting sets of values) and _kinds_ (expressions denoting sets of types).

> In this document, unless specified otherwise, we will use _term_ more generally to refer to a value term, a type, or a kind

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this document, unless specified otherwise, we will use _term_ more generally to refer to a value term, a type, or a kind.
```

Terms are composed of applications, built-in operators of the language (e.g., for performing computations, see [computation](#computation)), literals (see [literals](#literals)), and three kinds of atomic terms (_constants_, _variables_, and _parameters_) which we describe in the following.
A _function (symbol)_ is an atomic term having a function type, that is, a type of the form `(-> ... ...)`.
The builtin `eo::define` binder can be used for specifying terms that contain common subterms analogously to `let` binders in other languages.

The core language of Eunoia does not have any builtin SMT-LIB theories.
Instead, SMT-LIB theories may defined as Eunoia signatures.

> To enable that, the Eunoia language has the following builtin constants:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For this purpose, the Eunoia language has the following builtin constants:
```

The following commands are supported for declaring and defining types and terms. The first set of commands are identical to those in SMT-LIB version 3.0:

- `(declare-const <symbol> <type> <attr>*)` declares a constant named `<symbol>` whose type is `<type>`. Can be given an optional list of attributes (see [attributes](#attributes)).
<!-- Moved here because it is present in SMT-LIB 3 -->

- `(declare-consts <lit-category> <type>)` declares the class of symbols denoted by the literal category to have the given type.

- `(declare-type <symbol> (<type>*))` declares a new type constructor named `<symbol>` whose kind is `Type` if `<type>*` is empty. If `<type>*` is `<type_1> ... <type_n>`, then kind of `<symbol>` is `(-> <type_1> ... <type_n> Type)`.
  <!-- Added-->
  This is a derived command as it is a shorthand for
  `(declare-const <symbol> Type)` if `<type>*` is empty, and for
  `(declare-const <symbol> (-> <type>* Type))` otherwise.

> <!--CT Do we really need `define-type`? -->

Reviewer: Not really, no.  I am keeping if for now.

Author: ok

> __Note:__ Symbol overloading is supported, see [overloading](#overloading).

#### Example: Basic Declarations

```smt
(declare-type Int ())
(declare-const c Int)
(declare-const f (-> Int Int Int))
(declare-const g (-> Int (-> Int Int)))
(declare-const P (-> Int Bool))
```

Since Ethos does not assume any builtin definitions of SMT-LIB theories, definitions of standard symbols (such as `Int`) may be provided in Eunoia signatures<!--CT I bet this point is going to be confusing to users. -->. In the above example, symbol `c` is declared to be a constant (0-ary) symbol of type `Int`. The symbol `f` is a function taking two integers and returning an integer.

Observe that despite using different syntax in their declarations, the types of `f` and `g` in the above example are identical as `->` is a right-associative binary type constructor.

> > __Note:__ In Eunoia, all functions are unary. In the above example, `(-> Int Int Int)` is internally treated as `(-> Int (-> Int Int))`. Correspondingly, applications of functions are curried, e.g. `(f a b)` is treated as `((f a) b)`, which in turn can be seen as `(_ (_ f a) b)` where `_` denotes higher-order function application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> __Note:__ In the implementation of Ethos, all functions are unary. In the above example, `(-> Int Int Int)` is internally treated as `(-> Int (-> Int Int))`. Correspondingly, applications of functions are curried, e.g. `(f a b)` is treated as `((f a) b)`, which in turn can be seen as `(_ (_ f a) b)` where `_` denotes higher-order function application.
```

Author: Decided together to leave Eunoia there.

(declare-const b (IntArray Bool))
```

In the above example, we declare and integer type constructor of kind `Type` and array type constructor of kind is `(-> Type Type Type)`.

<!-- We should say something about the defines above -->

Note the following declarations generate terms of the same type:

```smt
(declare-type Array_v2 (Type Type))
(declare-const Array_v3 (-> Type Type Type))
```

<a name="literals"></a>

### The :type attribute for definitions

To type check terms, `define` statements can be annotated with `:type <term>`.

> <!-- We should motivate this feature. Why is it there? -->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This allows the user to eagerly check that a term has a particular type at the place where it is defined.
```

Intuitively, this definition is introducing a new function, indexed by a function, that is of type `(-> Int Int)`.
After parsing, the term `(@purify_fun f a)` is a function application whose operator is `(@purify_fun f)` and has a single child `a`.

> __Note:__ Opaque arguments should always be expected before other arguments. Otherwise all applications of the given function will be ill-typed.

<a name="attributes"></a>

### Declarations with attributes

The Eunoia language supports term annotations on declared constants, which for instance allow the user to treat a constant as being variadic, i.e. taking an arbitrary number of arguments. The available annotations for this purpose are:

- `:right-assoc` (resp. `:left-assoc`) denoting that application of the declared binary constant to more than two terms are to be treated as right (resp. left) associative,

- `:right-assoc-nil <term>` (resp. `:left-assoc-nil <term>`) denoting that applications of the declared binary constant to one or more terms are to be treated as right (resp. left) associative, with the given `<term>` used as an additional rightmost (resp. leftmost) argument.

> <!--CT Do we really want to restrict the nil element to be a symbol, as opposed to a term? -->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer: No, it can be a term.

- `:chainable <symbol>` denoting that the arguments of the declared binary constant are chainable using the (binary) operator given by `<symbol>`,

- `:pairwise <symbol>` denoting that the arguments of the declared constant are treated pairwise using the (binary) operator given by `<symbol>`.

- `:binder <symbol>` denoting that the first argument of the declared constant can be provided using a syntax for variable lists whose constructor is the one provided by `<symbol>`.

A declared function can be marked with at most one of the above attributes or an error is thrown.

> A parameter in a function symbol declaration may be marked with the following attribute:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A parameter may be marked with the following attribute:
```

Reviewer: Parameters may appear in function symbol declaration, but also in define, program, declare-rule.

`(or x y)` is treated as `(or x (or y false))`,
and `(or x)` is treated as `(or x false)`.
<!--CT added -->In contrast, if `or` was annotated with `left-associative-nil`,
`(or x y z)` would be treated as `(or (or (or false x) y) z)`,
`(or x y)` as `(or (or false x) y)`,
and `(or x)` as `(or false x)`.

The advantage of right or left associative operators with nil terminators is that the terms they specify are unambiguous, which is not the case for right or left associative operators without nil terminators.
In particular, note the following example:

```smt
(declare-const or (-> Bool Bool Bool) :right-assoc-nil false)
(define P ((x Bool) (y Bool) (z Bool)) (or x (or y z)))
(define Q ((x Bool) (y Bool) (z Bool)) (or x y z))
```

<!--CT We should stress that we get to different AST for the P and Q above.
-->

 <!--CT We should point out that the nil element should be a left and right identity of the assoc symbol, otherwise non-intuitive results occur. 

For instance, with
(declare-const + (-> Int Int Int) :right-assoc-nil 1)
We have that 
(+ x (+ y z))) = (+ x (+ (+ y (+ z 1)) 1)) = x + y + z + 2
is not equivalent to
(+ x (+ y (+ z 1))) = x + y + z + 1

> However, I would use this example not to argue that it is advantageous to use the :[left|right]-associative-nil annotation but to warn the reader that the nil element better be a left/right identity for the binary operator, otherwise the semantic is highly unintuitive.

Reviewer: Ok, I would suggest we add an additional example after this one to demonstrate this.

Author: Will do.

(declare-const re.all RegLan)
(declare-const re.inter (-> RegLan RegLan RegLan) :right-assoc-nil re.all)
```

This example defines the constant `re.all` (in SMT-LIB, this is the regular expression generating the set of all strings)
and the function `re.inter` (in SMT-LIB, the intersection of regular expressions), where the latter is defined to have a nil terminator
that references the free constant `re.all`.

However, when using `declare-const`, the nil terminator of an associative operator cannot depend on the parameters of the type of that function.
For example, say we wish to declare bitvector or (`bvor` in SMT-LIB), where its nil terminator is bitvector zero for the given bit width.
A possible declaration is the following:

```smt
(declare-const bvor
    (-> (! Int :var m :implicit) (BitVec m) (BitVec m) (BitVec m))
    :right-assoc-nil ???
)
```

The nil terminator of this operator is the bitvector zero whose width is `m`.
However note that `m` is not in scope of the declaration of its nil terminator.
We instead require such declarations to be made with `declare-parameterized-const`, which we will describe later in [param-constants](#param-constants).

#### List

> Atomic terms can be marked with the annotation `:list`.<!--CT Do we really need this level of generality? Can we restrict the annotation to just function arguments or perhaps just typed vars? -->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Parameters can be marked with the annotation `:list`. 
This includes those in function symbol declarations, as well as parameters to (e.g. `define`, `program`, `declare-rule`) commands.
```

Note that the type for chainable operators is typically `(-> T T S)` for some types `T` and `S`,
where the type of its chaining operator is `(-> S S S)`, and that operator has been as variadic via some attribute (e.g. `:right-assoc`).

#### Pairwise

```smt
(declare-type Int ())
(declare-const and (-> Bool Bool Bool) :right-assoc)
(declare-const distinct (-> (! Type :var T :implicit) T T Bool)
 :pairwise and)
(define P ((x Int) (y Int) (z Int)) (distinct x y z))
```

In the above example, `(distinct x y z)` is treated as `(and (distinct x y) (distinct x z) (distinct y z))`.

Note that the type for pairwise operators is typically `(-> T T S)` for some types `T` and `S`,

> where the type of its pairwise operator is `(-> S S S)`<!--CT This could be generalized, right? -->,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
where the type of its pairwise operator is `(-> S S S)`,
```

Reviewer: I think we discussed that this one cannot be generalized?

String values use the standard escape sequences as specified in SMT-LIB version 2.6, namely `""` within a string literal denotes `"`.
The only other escape sequences are of the form `\u{dn ...d1}` for `1<=n<=5` and `\u d4 d3 d2 d1` for hexadecimal digits `d1...d5` where `d5` is in the range `[0-2]`.

> __Note:__ Numeral, rational and decimal values are implemented by the arbitrary precision arithmetic library GMP. Binary and hexadecimal values are implemented as layer on top of numeral values that tracks a bit width. String values are implemented as a vector of unsigned integers whose maximum value is specified by SMT-LIB version 2.6, namely the character set corresponds to Unicode values 0 to 196607.

> > __Note:__ The user is not required to declare that `true` and `false` are values of type `Bool`. Instead, it is assumed that the syntactic category `<boolean>` of Boolean values (`true` and `false`) has been associated with the Boolean sort. In other words, `(declare-consts <boolean> __Note:__Bool)` is a part of the builtin signature assumed by Ethos.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> __Note:__ The user is not required to declare that `true` and `false` are values of type `Bool`. Instead, it is assumed that the syntactic category `<boolean>` of Boolean values (`true` and `false`) has been associated with the Boolean sort. In other words, `(declare-consts <boolean> Bool)` is a part of the builtin signature assumed by Ethos.
```

A signature defining these files can be found in [non-core-eval](#non-core-eval).
Note however that the evaluation of these operators is handled by more efficient methods internally in the Ethos, that is, they are not treated as syntax sugar internally.

### Core operators

- `(eo::is_eq t1 t2)`
  - Returns `true` if `t1` is (syntactically) equal to `t2`, or `false` if `t1` and `t2` are distinct and ground. Otherwise, it does not evaluate.

>  <!--CT To be discussed with Andy

Reviewer: This looks fine to me, we should add this formalism to the other operators as well.

A term of the form `(eo::as t (-> T1 ... Tn T))` evaluates to term `s` only if `(s k1 ... kn)` has type `T` where `k1 ... kn` are variables of type `T1 ... Tn`, and `t` and `s` are atomic terms with the same name.
If multiple such terms `s` exist, then the most recent one is returned.
Otherwise, the term `(eo::as t (-> T1 ... Tn T))` is unevaluated.
For example, `(eo::as - (-> Int Int Int))` evaluates to the second declared symbol in the example above.

## Declaring Proof Rules

The generic syntax for a `declare-rule` command accepted by `ethos` is:

```smt
(declare-rule <symbol> <keyword>? <sexpr>*)
```

When parsing this command, `ethos` will determine the format of the expected arguments based on the given keyword.
If the `<keyword>` is not provided, the we assume it has been marked `:ethos`.
All rules not marked with `:ethos` are not supported by the checker are unsupported and will cause the checker to terminate.

If the keyword is `:ethos`, then the expected syntax that follows is given below:

```smt
(declare-rule <symbol> :ethos (<typed-param>*) <assumption>? <premises>? <arguments>? <reqs>? :conclusion <term> <attr>*)
where
<assumption>   ::= :assumption <term>

> <premises>     ::= :premises (<term>*) | :premise-list <term><term>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<premises>     ::= :premises (<term>*) | :premise-list <term> <term>
```

<arguments>    ::= :args (<term>*)

> <reqs>         ::= :requires ((<term><term>)*)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<reqs>         ::= :requires ((<term> <term>)*)
```

```

This rule specifies symmetry of equality. This rule takes as premise an equality `(= t s)` and no arguments.

> In detail, an application of this proof rule for premise proof `(= a b)` for concrete terms `a,b` will compute the substitution `{ t ->a, s ->b }` and apply it to the conclusion term to obtain `(= b a)`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In detail, an application of this proof rule for premise proof `(= a b)` for concrete terms `a,b` will compute the substitution `{ t -> a, s -> b }` and apply it to the conclusion term to obtain `(= b a)`.
```

(step-pop @p4 (=> true (=> false true)) :rule implies-intro :premises (@p3))
```

## Side Conditions

Similar to `declare-rule`, the Ethos supports an extensible syntax for programs whose generic syntax is given by:

```smt

> (program <symbol> > <keyword>? <sexpr>*)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(program <symbol> <keyword>? <sexpr>*)
```

)
```

> > __Note:__ The Ethos automatically performs the above transformation on match terms for consistency.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> __Note:__ The Ethos checker automatically performs the above transformation on match terms for consistency.
```

```

For simplicity, the rule is given only for equalities of the integer sort, although this rule can be generalized.
The proof rule `trans` first packages an arbitrary number of premises, constructs a conjunction of these premises, which to bound to `E` and passed to the match term in the conclusion.
The recursive calls in the side condition `mk_trans` accumulate the endpoints of an equality chain and ensure via `eo::requires` that further equalities extend the left hand side of this chain.

## Including and referencing files

The Ethos supports the following commands for file inclusion:

- `(include <string>)`, which includes the file indicated by the given string. The path to the file is taken relative to the directory of the file that includes it.
- `(reference <string> <symbol>?)`, which similar to `include` includes the file indicated by the given string, and furthermore marks that file as being the _reference input_ for the current run of the checker (see below). The optional symbol can refer to a normalization routine (see below).

### Validation Proofs via Reference Inputs

> When the Ethos encounters a command of the form `(reference <string>)`, the checker enables a further set of checks that ensures that all assumptions in proofs correspond to assertions from the reference file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the Ethos encounters a command of the form `(reference <string>)`, the checker enables a further set of checks that ensures that all assumptions in proofs correspond to assertions from the file referenced by the given string.
```

In the above example, a proof rule is then defined that says that if `z` is an integer greater than or equal to `2`, is the product of two integers `x` and `y`, and is prime based on invoking `runIsPrime` in the given requirement, then we can conclude `false`.

<a name="responses"></a>

## Checker Response

After successfully parsing an input file with no errors, the Ethos will respond with one of two possibilities:

- `incomplete` if it parsed any `step` or `step-pop` application that referenced a proof rule that was marked with the attribute `:sorry`, or
- `correct` otherwise.

Note however that Ethos does not impose any requirements on _what_ was proven in the proof.
The user is responsible for ensure that e.g. the proof contains a step with a desired conclusion (e.g. `false`).

## Appendix

### Command line options of ethos

The Ethos command line interface can be invoked by `ethos <option>* <file>` where `<option>` is one of the following:

> - `--binder-fresh`: binders generate fresh variables when parsed in proof files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

- `--help`: displays a help message.

> - `--no-normalize-dec`: do not treat decimal literals as syntax sugar for rational literals.
> - `--no-normalize-hex`: do not treat hexadecimal literals as syntax sugar for binary literals.
> - `--no-parse-let`: do not treat `let` as a builtin symbol for specifying terms having shared subterms.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

In the above example, a proof rule is then defined that says that if `z` is an integer greater than or equal to `2`, is the product of two integers `x` and `y`, and is prime based on invoking `runIsPrime` in the given requirement, then we can conclude `false`.

<a name="responses"></a>

## Checker Response

After successfully parsing an input file with no errors, the Ethos will respond with one of two possibilities:

- `incomplete` if it parsed any `step` or `step-pop` application that referenced a proof rule that was marked with the attribute `:sorry`, or
- `correct` otherwise.

> Note however that the Ethos does not impose any requirements on _what_ was proven in the proof.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note however that Ethos does not impose any requirements on _what_ was proven in the proof.
```

- `-t <tag>`: enables the given trace tag (for debugging).
- `-v`: verbose mode, enable all standard trace messages.

> The following options impact how proof files and reference files are parsed only (for details on classifications of files, see [full-syntax](#full-syntax)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following options impact how proof files and reference files are parsed only (for details on classifications of files, see [full-syntax](#full-syntax).
```

```

> Moreover, a valid input for a file included by the Eunoia command `<reference>` is `<smtlib2-command>*`;
> a valid input for a file included by the Eunoia command `<include>` is `<eo-command>*`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
